Exhibit Date s:  July 2013 – September 2014  
 
From Numerous to Non -existent:  Common, Rare, 
Threatened, Endangered, and Extinct Species in the 
Collections of the Natural Science Research Laboratory 
 
The Museum’s Natural Science Research Laboratory (NSRL), ma intains collections of preserved mammal, 
bird, and invertebrate specimens, and frozen tissues of these specimens, for scientific research and 
education purposes.  These collections represent a record of the natural history of Texas, North 
America, and othe r areas of the world.  
 Of the 2,331 mammal and bird species represented in the NSRL’s collections, at least 197 currently  are 
listed as at risk on either the Endangered Species list of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service 
(USFWS) or on the Red List of  Threatened Species of  the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN).   
 
 
 
 
   

--- Page break ---

Where Did These Specimens Come From?  
 
Most of the specimens in the NSRL collections represent abundant and widespread species that were 
collected from the wild f or scientific research.  Proper government authority and collecting permits 
are required and obtained for all such studies.  
 Many of the threatened and endangered animal specimens on display were donated to the Museum by 
individuals or by other museums. M ost of these specimens are several decades old, and they were 
collected long before the species was at risk. Other rare specimens were donated to the Museum by 
zoological parks after the animal's natural death.  
 
None of the specimens in the NSRL collectio ns that currently are recognized as at risk were collected 
from the wild while the species had protected status.  
 
 
The Endangered Species Act –  40 Years of Protecting At Risk Animals 
and Plants  
 
The passage of the Endangered Species Act in 1973 gave the US FWS the authority to recognize plant and 
animal species as threatened or endangered, and to develop recovery plans for these species.   
 
Current Number of Endangered or Threatened Species in the U.S.  
 Threatened  Endangered  
Mammals  15 69 
Birds  15 81 
Rept iles 22 14 
Amphibians  10 16 
Fishes  70 83 
Other Animal Groups (clams, snails, 
insects, arachnids, crustaceans, corals)  39 187 
Plants (flowering plants, conifers, ferns, 
lichens)  149 667 
 
  

--- Page break ---

The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species  
 
The International Uni on for Conservation of Nature maintains a Red List  that categorizes species, world -
wide, by level of threat to their existence.  The IUCN’s mission is to determine and rank the conservation 
status of species, on a scale from least concern to critically end angered or extinct.   
 
 
What causes a species to become threatened, endangered, or extinct?  
 Extinction of a species can be caused by natural phenomena, such as disease, competition with other 
species, or natural catastrophic events.  
 
Most of the species that have become extinct in recent history, or currently are threatened or 
endangered , however , are the result of human activities.   
 
The most common man -made threats to wild species are changes in habitat, including destruction, 
degradation, or fragmentat ion (creating small,  isolated pockets of habitat). Pollution, introduction of 
non-native and invasive species, and over- exploitation are other common threats to the surv ival of 
many species on Earth. Climate change is recognized as an increasingly importan t threat and can lead to 
changes in a species available range, food sources, reproductive patterns, and predator- prey 
relationships.  
 
 
 

--- Page break ---

Woolly Mammoth 
Extinct  
 
The NSRL’s Genetic Resources Collection 
includes tubes of frozen tissue from two 
individual woo lly mammoths ( Mammuthus 
primigenius ), one male and one female. The 
samples were collected from mammoth 
remains discovered in the riverbeds of the 
Yuribei and Khatanga Rivers in northern 
Siberia (Russia), j ust south of the Arctic 
Ocean. The remains were identified as being 
10,000 and 53,000 years old, respectively.  
 
 
 
Tubes of frozen woolly mammoth tissue samples, donated to the Museum in 1994.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Woolly mammoth replica at the Royal BC Museum in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.  
 
What caused  the last of the mammoth species to go extinct, at the end of the Pleistocene (Ice Ages)? 
Climate change during that period in Earth’s history is the leading theory.  What role ancient peoples 
may have played in their extinction is unclear and widely debat ed.  
  
 

--- Page break ---

 
Recently, scientists in Russia and South Korea have embarked 
on an ambitious project to try to clone a woolly mammoth by 
using frozen tissues, such as the  ones in the NSRL collections. 
They are attempting to create a living woolly mammoth by 
inserting the DNA -storing nucleus of a mammoth cell into the 
egg of an Asian elephant, and implanting the embryo into the 
womb of a female elephant. So far, no one has been able to 
harvest eggs successfully from an elephant, so the experiment 
has not yet been attempted.   
 
Advances in science have made the possibility of bringing back 
extinct species, especially of more recently -extinct animals, 
very real. This possibility raises many complex ethical issues, 
as well as environmental concerns that the scientific  
community has only begun to explore and debate.  The 
National Geographic article highlighted here is a recent 
example of the on -going discussion among scientists abou t 
the feasibility, and the pros and cons, of bringing back extinct                                                                                                                     
species.  
 
 
 
 
   
Lyuba, a mummified infant woolly mammoth.  This photo 
was taken while the preserved baby mammoth was part of a special exhibit, “Mammoths and Mas todons,” at the 
Field Museum of Chicago.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
This mummified baby mammoth, dubbed Lyuba, was discovered lying on a river bank in Siberia in 2 007. 
Lyuba was just one month old when she di ed more than 40,000 years ago. Researchers theorize that she 
drowne d in river mud and froze in a piece of ice. Thousands of years later the ice floated to the surface 
and then melted, due to global warming. Her body remained so well -preserved that researchers have 
been able to identify her last meal in her stomach –  her m other’s milk and dung.  

--- Page break ---

Scimatar -horned Oryx  
Extinct in Wild  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The scimatar -horned oryx ( Oryx dammah) 
formerly inhabited much of North Africa. 
This species has been listed as Extinct in 
the Wild since 2000.  
 
This spiral- horned antelope is adapted to  arid grasslands and semi- desert habitats. Oryx populations 
originally began to decline as a result of climate changes that caused the Sahara regions of North Africa to become even drier than usual. The eventual extinction of the oryx was due primarily to overhunting 
for its meat, horns, and hide.  Habitat loss and competition with domestic livestock also contributed to 
the extinction of the species.  
 The scimitar -horned oryx still can be found in zoological parks and in some privately -owned captive 
herds.  A global captive breeding program for the species was initiated in the 1960s, and fenced -in herds 
have been reintroduced in several national parks in the African nations of Tunisia, Morocco, and Senegal 
as part of long -term reintroduction efforts.  
 
 
 
This skull of a scimitar- horned oryx shows the spectacular spiral, backward -curving horns of the species. 
The horns of an adult can reach 3 to 4 feet in length.  Both males and females have horns, although the horns of the females tend to be narrower in diam eter.  


--- Page break ---

Western or Lowland Gorilla  
Critically Endangered -  IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male western gorilla at the Bronx Zoo . 
 
  
 
  
 
The western gorilla ( Gorilla gorilla ) was first categorized on the IUCN Red List as vulnerable in 1986. It 
was elevated to Endangered  status in 1996, then to Critically Endangered  in 2007.   This species has 
suffered dramatic population declines due to continued poaching (even in protected areas) and to the 
spread of the Ebola virus, a deadly dis ease that also affects humans. In some areas, gorilla populations 
have been reduced by over 90%.  Overall, their numbers have declined by more than 60% over the last 
20 to 25 years.  
 
Controlling the threats of poaching and di sease are extremely difficult. Furthermore, gorilla reprodu ctive 
rates are extremely low. Even if an immediate end to Ebola deaths and drastic reduction in hunting were 
possible, population recovery w ould require 75 years or more. Further, habitat loss and degradation 
from agriculture, timber extraction , mining, and possibly climate change are increasing threats. 
Extinction of the species in the wild is a very real possibility and will require drastic conservation 
measures to avert.  
 
 
 
Skull of a male western gorilla 
(also known as lowland 
gorilla).  T he NSRL obtained 
this specimen in 1987 from the 
San Antonio Zoo  
 

--- Page break ---

Brown Pelican  
Least Concern –  IUCN;  Delisted -  USFWS  
Population Trend – Increasing  
 
The brown pelican ( Pelecanus occidentalis ) is common and widespread throughout most of its range and 
curre ntly is not listed by the USFWS or the IUCN Red List as an at risk species. So why is this species in 
this exhibit?  Because it represents a success story of the Endangered Species Act.  
 
The brown pelican was formerly listed as Endangered in t he United Sta tes by the USFWS. It was listed as 
such in 1970, under a law that preceded the E ndangered Species Act of 1973. In November 2009, 
however, the species was “delisted due to recovery” from the USFWS Endangered Species List.   
 
With the advent and widespread u se of the pesticide DDT in the 1940s through the 1960s, pelican 
populations rapidly declined du e to lack of breeding success. Pelicans are fish -eaters, and when they ate 
fish that were contaminated with DDT, the shells of their eggs became so thin that the y broke during 
incubation.   
 
In 1972, the Environmental Protection Agency banned the use of DD T in the United States (U.S.). As a 
result of the ban, as well as recovery efforts such as reintroduction programs and the protection and 
restoration of nesting habitats, the brown pelic an has made a strong comeback. Throughout its range 
along the eastern and western coasts of the U.S., Central America, and northern South America, the 
brown pelican population now is estimated to number more than 650,000 individual s and is continuing 
to increase.   
 
  


--- Page break ---

Bald Eagle  
 Least Concern –  IUCN ; Delisted – USFWS   
Population Trend – Increasing   
 
Similar to the brown pelican, the bald eagle ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus ) is another success story of the 
Endangered Species Act.  
 
 
 
 
When the bald eagle was adopted as the 
nation’s symbol in 1782, as many as 100,000 
nesting pairs of bald eagles were in this 
country. By the mid to late 1800s, bald eagle 
populations began to decline as the result of 
the birds being shot to protect livestoc k, as 
well as the loss of nesting habitat. By 1940, Congress recognized that the species was “threatened with extinction,” and passed the 
Bald Eagle Protection Act that prohibited 
killing, selling, or possessing the species. This 
Act, however, did not put in place any efforts 
to protect habitat or otherwise restore the 
species’ numbers.  
  
 
 
The use of DDT, beginning in the 1940s, quickly erased any recovery that may have begun after the 
passage of the Bald Eagle Protection Act.  DDT sprayed to control insec ts washed into nearby water 
supplies, where aquati c plants and fish absorbed it. The eagles then were contaminated when they ate 
the fish that caused the shells of their eggs to be so thin that  they broke during incubation. By 1963, only 
417 nesting pairs of bald eagles remained in the U.S.  
 
Banning the use of DDT in 1972 was the critical first step on the road t o recovery for the bald eagle. In 
1978, the species was listed as Endangered and a recovery plan was implemented that included captive breeding pro grams, reintroduction efforts, law enforcement to control illegal shoot ing, and nest site 
protection. By 1995, populations had recovered enough to elevate the species from Endangered to 
Threatened, and in 2007 the species was “delisted due to recovery.” The most recent information 
available indicates at least 9,789 nesting pairs are in the lower 48 states.  

--- Page break ---

African Lion  
Vulnerable – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 Male lion in Namibia, Africa .   
 
African lions ( Panthera leo ) are found in most countri es in sub -Saharan Africa, particularly in eastern and 
southern Africa. They are extinct in North Africa, and regionally endangered in West Africa.   
 
Within the last 20 years, the species has been reduced in population by app roximately 30%. The primary 
causes of this reduction are indiscriminate retaliatory or pre -emptive killing by humans to protect life 
and livestock, as well as depletion of the lion’s natural prey. In addition, habitat loss and land conversion have led to a number of populations becoming small and isolated.  
 
Trophy hunting still is permitted in some countries where healthy lion populations remain, and this 
practice can be an important management tool for providing financial resources for lion conservation.   
  
  


--- Page break ---

Cheetah  
Vulnerable – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
Once widespread across Africa and Asia, cheetahs ( Acinonyx jubatus ) have disappeared from more than 
75% of their historic range in Africa, and almost all of their historic range in Asia. They are estimated to 
number only 7,500- 10,000 across their entire range on the continent of Africa.  Asiatic cheetahs remain 
only in Iran, where the species is Critically Endangered.  
 Wild ungulate populations in most of Africa as well as Asia have been depleted due to over- hunting a nd 
competition with livestock. With their natural prey base depleted, cheetah reproduction and survival are 
reduced, and in many areas, cheetahs hav e turned to livestock as prey. A large proportion of the 
remaining cheetahs in Africa exist outside of protected areas, in lands that are ranched for livestock, and 
a number of countries permit cheetahs to be killed in d efense of life and livestock. Thus, conflicts with 
farmers and ranchers pose a major threat to the species. Habitat loss and fragmentation is also a threat 
to the sur vival of the cheetah in Africa.  Most existing protected areas are not large enough to ensure the 
long- term survival of the species.  
 
Conservation practices that are being promoted to save this species include livestock management plans 
that minimize conflict with cheetahs, livestock herd protection using guard dogs, and improvements to 
the availability of wild prey.   
 


--- Page break ---

Leopard  
Near Threatened – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
  
Leopards (Panthera pardus ) are locally common in some p arts of Africa and tropical Asia.  However, they 
are declining in large parts of their range, and have disappeared from at least one -third of t heir historic 
range in Africa.  They are on the verge of extinction in North Africa.   
 
Primary threats to the leo pard are habitat loss an d fragmentation, and poaching. There are high levels of 
human -leopard conflict in some areas of Africa, where they are persecuted for real and perceived 
livestock losses. A rapidly increasing threat is the poisoning of carcasses  as a mean of predator control.  
In rainforest regions near human populations, they compete with humans for many of the prey animals 
that make up the die t of both the leopard and man. To a lesser degree, leopards are killed for the illegal 
trade of skins and fo r body parts that are used in traditional rituals.  
 The majority of leopards occur outside of protected areas, and improved measures for protecting 
livestock and mitigating conflicts with leopard are needed to protect the species. Although some 
leopards oc cur in protected areas, many of these areas are too small to support viable populations.  
  


--- Page break ---

Tiger  
Endangered – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
Siberian tiger       Sumatran tiger  
 Tigers ( Panthera tigris ) once ranged widely across Asia, from Turkey in the west to th e coast of Russia in 
the east. During the last century, they have lost over 93% of their historic range, and they have 
disappeared from large areas of southwestern, southeaste rn, eastern, and central Asia. They are 
currently found in 13 Asi an range states.  
 Tiger populations have declined at l east 50% since just the 1990s. It is estimated that just 3,000 remain 
in the wild. This downward trend in tiger pop ulations is likely to persist. In some areas, the causes of 
their reduction may not be  reversible.  
 
Poaching and illegal trade of tiger skins, bones, meat, and “tonics” (traditional medicines) are the 
primary threat to tigers. Habitat loss and competition with humans for a rapidly declining ungulate prey 
base are also are threats.  
 In 2010, the Year of the Tiger on the Asian lunar calendar, a Tiger Summit was held by the 13 tiger range 
countries and a Global Tiger Recovery Program was adopted. The goal is to double the number of wild 
tigers by 2022  (the next Year of the Tiger). The Recovery  Program is an ambitious and unprecedented 
plan between the range countries to cooperatively preserve, protect, and restore tiger habitats, to eradicate poaching and trade, and ultimately to restore tigers to their former range.  
  
  

--- Page break ---

Clouded Leopard  
Vulnera ble –  IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The clouded leopard ( Neofelis nebulosa) is found from the Himalayan foothills in Nepal through 
mainland Southeast Asia into China. The species once had a wide distribution in China, but the anima ls 
are disappearing from many areas as the result of hab itat loss and illegal hunting. These reclusive 
animals are difficult to trap and monitor. It is estimated that there are less than 10,000 remaining in the 
wild, in scattered, isolated populations of n o more than 1,000 each.  
 The clouded leopard is strongly associated with dense tropical forest, which is disappearing across most 
of its range. I n fact, their habitat in Southeast Asia is undergoing the world’s fastest deforestation rate 
(1.2-1.3% per year  since 1990).   
 
Hunting for the trade of clouded leopard skins, bones, meat, and live animals for the pet trade also are 
significant and increasing threats, despite national legislation protecting the species throughout most of 
its range.  
  
  

--- Page break ---

Snow Leopard  
Endangered – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 The snow leopard ( Panthera uncia) is restricted to the high mountains of Central Asia, with a known 
range in 12 countries. Although there is a lack of information about current snow leopard status across  
much of its potential distribution, they are estimated to number somewhere between 4,000 and 6,000 
animals in the wild.    
 
A primary threat to the snow leopard is depletion of its natural prey base (various species of wild sheep 
and goats, ibex, deer, bo ar, and smaller prey) due to hunting by humans as well as competition with 
livestock. The declining natural prey base escalates livestock depredation by snow leopards, and puts 
them at increased risk of  being killed in retribution. Human population growth,  habitat fragmentation, 
poaching and illegal trade, and a lack of conservation capacity, policy, and awareness in its range countries also contribute to the threats faced by the snow leopard.  
 
Up to a third of the snow leopards range falls along politically sensitive international borders, 
complicating conservation initiatives. Military conflict is taking place across much of its range, causing 
damage to many wildlife species in the region through destruction of habitat, direct killing of wildlife, 
losses t o land mines, and increased poaching and trade.  
 
Numerous conservation agencies are working to conserve the snow leopard and its t hreatened 
mountain ecosystems. These agencies have been working with many of the national governments from 
the snow leopard’s range to promote research, community programs, and education programs.   


--- Page break ---

Southern Long -nosed Bat  
Vulnerable – IUCN ; Endangered - USFWS  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
The southern long- nosed bat ( Leptonycteris curacoae ) is a nectar -feeding, migratory ba t. This highly 
specialized species feeds on the nectar and pollen of agave and cactus, and is recognized as a “keystone” 
species in its ecosystem for its role as a pollinator and seed disperser of these desert plants.  
 One subspecies of this bat occurs in the South American countries of Colombia, Venezuela, Margarita 
Island , Curaçao, Bonaire, and Aruba. A second subspecies occurs in North America in Mexico and in the 
states of New Mexico and Arizona.  Some populations of this subspecies migrate north to mat ernity 
roosts from southern Mex ico, and give birth in spring. Other bats of this subspecies migrate to maternity 
roosts in central and southern Mexico and give birth in the winter after mating in the summer.   
 
In all parts of its range, it is an uncommon species and is restricted to habitat type s that are rare and 
dispersed. Further, it depends upon a limited number of caves for breeding colonies, and these caves 
are vulnerable to vandalism.  
 
The species is threatened by habitat destruction and degradatio n, and has suffered a population decline 
of more than 30% over the last three generations.  
  
  


--- Page break ---

Indiana Bat  
Endangered – IUCN ; Endangered - USFWS  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
The Indiana bat ( Myotis sodalis ) occurs exclusively in the United States a nd is known primarily from 
eastern and mid -western states, westward to Oklahoma, and southward into Alabama and Arkansas. 
The species has disappeared from or greatly declined in most of its former range in t he northeastern 
United States. Overall, the species has suffered a population decline of more than 50% in just the last 10 
years.  
 
This insect -eating bat lives in forest habitats as well as agricultural and grassland areas. In winter, the 
bats come together to hibernate in only a few caves within its ran ge that provide the necessa ry 
conditions for hibernation. Its dependence on these caves makes the population especially vulnerable.  
 During winter hibernation, human threats to the colonies include the rousing of the hibernating bats, 
direct handling of th e bats, vandalism of caves, indiscriminate killing or complete elimination of colonies, 
and commercialization of caves that lead to in creased disturbance by humans. Other threats to the 
species include exclusion from caves by poorly designed gates, and cha nges in cave temperatures or 
humidity as the result of opening additional entrances or otherwise changing air flow.  
 
During summer, the loss of habitat and roost sites due to impoundment, stream channelization, housing 
development, clear cutting for agricu lture, or forest management practices that eliminate maternity 
roosts are factors that contribute to population declines.  
  
  


--- Page break ---

Saltmarsh Harvest Mouse  
Endangered – IUCN ; Endangered -  USFWS  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
The saltmarsh harvest mouse ( Reithrodontomys raviventris ) is restricted to an exceptionally small range.  
It occurs only in tidal marsh habitats bordering San Francisco Bay in California.  This habitat is becoming increasingly fragmented into small and isolated patches.   
 
Most of the hi storical tidal marsh habitat for this species has been lost as a result of filling for urban 
development and conversion to agricultural uses and commercial salt production.  Upland vegetation 
adjoining tidal marshes is important cover for harvest mice during high tides and storms, but much of 
the upland habitat surrounding the marshes also has been lost due to development.   
 
Other threats to the species include pollution, intrusion of fresh water into the salt marshes, and the 
invasive spread of exotic plant species that are not suitable habitat for these mice.  Over the long term, 
the potential rise in sea levels due to global climate change could result in major losses of tidal marsh 
habitat for this endangered mouse.  
  
  

--- Page break ---

American Bison  
 Near Threatened – IUCN  
Population Trend – Stable   
 
 
 
The IUCN lists the American 
bison ( Bison bison) as Near 
Threatened  based on its 
dependence on an ongoing conservation program, a limited 
number of viable populations, 
and small population sizes.  
There are two recognized 
subspecies, the plains bison and 
the wood bison.  
 
 Bison once ranged in massive herds across the North American continent, from northern Mexico to 
Alaska.  The species was nearly wiped out by overhunting in the 19
th century, however.  Today, bison 
occupy  less than 1% of their original range in North America.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Original bison range    Current bison range (managed herds)  
 Although the species has partially recovered, all current populations occur within active management 
programs, and most are m anaged as private captive commercial herds.  Very few herds are managed 
strictly for species conservation.  Although the species is not in decline, it is vulnerable to potential changes in management and is completely dependent on continued conservation ef forts.  

--- Page break ---

Grey Wolf 
 Least Concern –  IUCN ; Partially Delisted – USFWS  
Population Trend – Stable    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The grey wolf ( Canis lupus ) was once the world’s most widely distributed mammal.  Poisoning and other 
forms of persecution by humans in ord er to protect livestock from depredation, and out of unwarranted 
fear of attacks on man, has reduced their original worldwide range by more than one -third.  It is now 
gone from much of its former range in Western Europe, Mexico, and the United States, and is generally 
restricted to wilderness and remote areas.  
 
In the western United States, grey wolf populations were extirpated by the 1930s.  However, legal 
protection since the passage of the Endangered Species Act in 1973, changes in public attitudes, and  
land -use changes led to natural re -colonization  in parts of its range as wolves moved southward from 
Canada into Montana.  The species also has been reintroduced in Yellowstone National Park (Wyoming), and parts of Montana and Idaho.  
 

--- Page break ---

Former and current worldwide distribution of the Grey wolf.    
 
 
In May 2011, the USFWS delisted wolves as an Endangered or Threatened species in Idaho, Montana 
and parts of Oregon, Washington, and Utah.  Estimates in 2012 indicated minimum wolf populations of 
625 in Montana;  683 in Idaho; 277 in Wyoming; 43 in Washington; and 46 in Oregon.  
 
Although it still faces some threats, at a global level the grey wolf does not qualify as Threatened due to 
its relatively widespread range and stable population trend.  Regionally, some populations remain 
seriously threatened.  These threats include competition with humans for livestock and increasingly 
fragmented habitats that are becoming too small to maintain long -term viability.  
  
  


--- Page break ---

Red Wolf  
 Critically Endangered – IUCN ; Endangered –  USFWS  
Population Trend – Increasing   
 
Historically, the red wolf ( Canis rufus ) occurred 
in the eastern and southeastern United States 
from Texas to Florida and northward into New 
England.  The species was extinct in the wild by 
1980, but captive breeding programs that began 
in 1976 have successfully maintained the 
species.  In 1987, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service began a reintroduction program, and 
established an experimental population on a 
peninsula in eastern North Carolina.  The species 
is now com mon within the reintroduction area, 
but its abundance outside the reintroduction 
area is unknown.  
 
 
In 1991, a second reintroduction project was initiated at the Great 
Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee.  Despite the release 
of 37 red wolves from 1992 to 1998, the wolves failed to establish a 
successful breeding population.  Many of the adults died or left the protected boundaries of the park and were recaptured, and most of 
the pups known to have been born in the wild died of disease, 
predation, m alnutrition, or parasites.  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service terminated the Tennessee restoration effort in 1998.  
 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildli fe staff with two red wolf pups  
bred in captivity for potential release into the wild.   
 
 
 
 
 
The primary threat to th e survival of the species is hybridization with coyotes.  Hybridization was a 
factor in the red wolf’s initial demise in the wild, and an increase in the abundance of coyotes within the 
reintroduction area in eastern North Carolina threatens the genetic in tegrity of the red wolves there.  
  

--- Page break ---

Marbled Murrelet  
 Endangered – IUCN ; Threatened (except Alaska) – USFWS 
Population Trend  – Decreasing   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The marbled murrelet ( Brachyramphus marmoratus ) occurs in the northwestern United States 
(California, Oregon, Washington, Alaska) and in British Columbia, Canada.  Nearly 85% of the population 
occurs in Alaska.  This species is dependent on both old -growth forest habitats for nesting and near-
shore ocean waters for feeding.   
 
While the species is  still abundant, its total population is estimated to have undergone a very rapid 
reduction in recent years.  The greatest declines have been in Washington, Oregon, and California.  In 1992, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service listed the species as Threaten ed in Washington and Oregon and 
Endangered in California.  It is believed that the species will likely become extinct in California within the 
next 40 years.  Even in Alaska, the population has undergone a 71% decline since the early 1990’s, 
dropping from nearly a million birds to about 271,000 today.  
 
The primary threats to the species are loss of old -growth forests for nesting habitat, declines in prey 
quality and abundance due to global climate change, the use of nylon monofilament gill -nets in shallow 
waters where the birds feed, and oil spills.  
  

--- Page break ---

Aplomado Falcon  
 Least Concern –  IUCN ; Endangered (northern subspecies) –  
USFWS 
Population Trend  – Increasing   
 
 
 
The A plomado falcon ( Falco femoralis ) has a 
very large distribution throughout much of South Am erica and Central America, and its 
population trend appears to be increasing.  
For these reasons, it is not considered by the 
International Union for Conservation of 
Nature as a threatened species.  
 
In the United States, however, the northern 
subspecies of  this falcon, Falco femoralis 
septentrionalis , has been listed as Endangered 
by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service since 
1986.  This subspecies once occurred from 
Mexico into extreme southeastern Arizona, 
southern New Mexico, and southern and 
western Texas , but had disappeared from the 
U.S. and northern Mexico by the 1950s.  The 
reasons for its decline in the United States are 
linked to habitat changes resulting from 
overgrazing by cattle, shrub encroachment 
due to control of range fires, and agricultural 
development.  
 
 
Although a remnant population of northern A plomado falcon remains in Chihuahua, Mexico, natural re -
colonization of its former U.S. habitats by these birds is unlikely due to long -term drought, continued 
shrub encroachment, and the species’ sl ow reproductive rate.   
 
In cooperative arrangements between the USFWS, the Bureau of Land Management, the Department of 
Defense, the wildlife agencies of Texas and New Mexico, and several private conservation groups, 
several reintroduction efforts and hab itat conse rvation plans for the northern A plomado falcon are 
underway in Texas and New Mexico.  These efforts serve as prime examples of cooperative conservation 
among federal, state, and private entities to recover a species from the brink of extinction.  

--- Page break ---

Red-cockaded Woodpecker  
 Vulnerable – IUCN ; Endangered –  USFWS  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The red -cockaded woodpecker ( Picoides borealis ) was once distributed throughout the southeastern 
United States.  Between 1980 and 1990, the p opulation declined by at least 23%, and by 1999, it was 
limited to approximately 11,000 birds in 30 isolated populations.   
 
This species relies on open pine -forest habitats.  It is a cooperative breeder, nesting in large groups that 
require at least 200 acres of habitat per group.  It nests in the cavities of old -growth trees (100+ years 
old).   
 The primary cause of this species’ decline has been habitat loss to due to excessive cutting of old -growth 
forests and other forestry practices that have fragment ed the habitat, often into patches too small to 
support the group nesting behavior of the species.   
 
Conservation actions to preserve this species have included the translocation of young females to 
improve breeding success, the construction of artificial cavities, and burning of understory vegetation to 
improve habitat.  Additional efforts to protect, conserve, and enhance habitat for this species will be 
necessary to ensure its survival.  
 

--- Page break ---

Tree Pangolin  
 Near Threatened – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasi ng  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Captive tree pangolin in Central Democratic Republic of the Congo .   
 
 
The tree pangolin ( Phataginus tricuspis ), also known as the scaly anteater, is native to the forests of 
central Africa.  This species is thought to have decline d in number by 20 -25% over the past 15 years.   
 
The tree pangolin is widely, and often intensively, harvested by native peoples for meat.  It is commonly 
found in African bush meat  markets.  The scales also are used to make boots and shoes and are used as  
indigenous ornaments and in traditional medicines.  The IUCN assessment indicates that current levels 
of harvest are unsustainable, and the species could soon be elevated to the Threatened level.  
 
While the species is present in a number of protected area s in Africa, there is a need to develop and 
enforce protective legislation within its range.    
  
  

--- Page break ---

The three species discussed here illustrate the varying 
population status and use of fur -bearing species.   
 
Eastern Cottontail  
 Least Concern –  IUCN  
Popula tion Trend – Increasing  
 
 
The eastern cottontail ( Sylvilagus floridanus ) is widely 
distributed and abundant throughout its range from 
southern Canada, the United States, Central America, 
and into northern South America.  It can survive in many 
habitats, and has been introduced in some areas outside 
its range.  Where it has been introduced, it sometimes displaces native species of rabbits.  Although historically 
trapped and hunted for its fur as well as its meat, it has 
little value as a fur- bearer today.  
 
 
American Mink  
 Least Concern –  IUCN  
Population Trend – Stable  
 
The American  mink ( Neovison vison ) 
also has a wide distribution and is 
relatively common across its range in 
Canada and the United States.  Its fur 
is among the most valuable of all fur-
bearing animals, and it is the most 
important species in fur -tanning 
operations.  Although wild populations 
are still hunted for fur, most mink fur production today comes from farm -
raised animals.  
 
 

--- Page break ---

Long -tailed Chinchilla  
 Critically Endangered – IUCN  
Popula tion Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
Captive (pet) chinchilla.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The long- tailed chinchilla ( Chinchilla lanigera) is native to the Andes Mountains of Chile in South 
America.  Once widespread, the species is now Critically Endangered in the wild.  The prim ary threats to 
the species are illegal hunting for its fur and reduction of habitat quality due to overgrazing by livestock, 
mining, and firewood extraction.  Despite current protection measures, its population has declined more 
than 90% in just the last 1 5 years.  Similar to the mink, chinchilla today are raised on farms for fur 
production, as well as for the pet industry.  
  
  

--- Page break ---

Elephant Bird  
 Extinct  
 
 
 
The elephant bird ( Aepyornis  sp.) was a giant, 
flightless bird native to the island of Madagascar, 
off t he southeastern coast of Africa.  The species 
became extinct in the 17th or 18th century, 
probably due to human activity.  At over 800 pounds, elephant birds were the heaviest birds to 
ever live and laid the world’s largest eggs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
An elephant bird egg from the Ornithology Collection of the 
Natural Science Research Laboratory.  
  
 
 
 

--- Page break ---

Southern Rockhopper Penguin  
 Vulnerable – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The southern rockhopper penguin ( Eudyptes chrysocome ) breeds on islands in the South Atlanti c, Indian, 
and Pacific Oceans. Many of the subpopulations of this species have undergone drastic declines, some 
by as much as 94%. Overall, the number of these birds has declin ed 34% over the past 37 years. 
Research is  ongoing to determine what is causing these population declines, but there appear to be a 
variety of factors effecting the various subpopulations. These include human depredation, overgrazing 
by introduced animals, algae blooms, oil exploration, and effect s of climate change.  
 
  

--- Page break ---

Bell’s Vireo 
 Near Threatened – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
The Bell's vireo  (Vireo bellii) is a small North American  songbird that occurs in summer in the central and 
southwestern United States and northern Mexico.  Its range in winter occurs from south Baja California 
southward through Central America. It has undergone moderate population declines due to habitat loss.  
Brood parasitism by the cowbird ( Molothrus ater ) also is contributing to its decline in the southwestern 
U.S.  A subspecies in southern California is listed as Endangered.  
 
  

--- Page break ---

Greater Prairie Chicken  
 Vulnerable - IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
The greater prairie chicken ( Tympanuchus cupido ) occurs in prairie and mixed prairie -cropland habitats 
of the United States.  There are three subspecies, which vary in status:  the heath hen  of the eastern U.S. 
has been extinct since 1932; the Attwater’s prairie chicken  is restricted to small portions of coastal 
prairie in southeastern Texas, and is considered one of the most critically endangered bird species in the 
United States; and the greater prairie chicken subspecies is extinct or nearly extinct in 15 states, but 
numerous enough to be legally harvested in four states.  
 
Overall, th e species has been in long- term decline.  Habitat loss and fragmentation due to the 
conversion of native prairie to cropland, overgrazing by livestock, and development are the most 
significant causes of their decline.  Studies also suggest the species is s ensitive to human disturbance, 
and the birds will not nest near power lines, roads, and farms.  Climate change and drought also are 
detrimental to the birds’ ability to successfully rear young.  
 

--- Page break ---

Egyptian Vulture  
 Endangered – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decrea sing  
 
 
The Egyptian vulture ( Neophron percnopterus ) is known from a large range encompassing parts of 
Africa, Europe, and Asia.  Despite its wide distribution, resident populations are isolated and many have 
suffered drastic declines in recent years.  Ove rall, the species has undergone dramatic population 
declines in India, Europe, and West Africa.  
 
This species faces a number of threats, including direct disturbance, lead poisoning, direct poisoning, 
electrocution by power lines, collisions with wind turb ines, reduced food availability, and habitat loss.  
 
  

--- Page break ---

Reeve’s Pheasant  
 Vulnerable – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
Reeve’s pheasant ( Syrmaticus reevesii ) is native only to central and easte rn China.  Its population is 
declining primarily due to loss and fragmentation of its evergreen forest habitats.  Other threats include 
hunting for food and for the collection of its long tail plumes, and collection of its eggs.  It has already 
been extirp ated from some provinces.  
 
 
  


--- Page break ---

Ostrich  
 Least Concern –  IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
The ostrich ( Struthio camelus ) has an extremely large range encompassing much of Africa.  Although the 
overall population trend appears to be decreasing, it does not meet the criteria for listing as Vulnerable 
by the IUCN.  It is still considered to be abundant throughout most of its range.  
 
  

--- Page break ---

Emu  
 Least Concern –  IUCN  
Population Trend – Stable  
 
 
The emu ( Dromaius novaehollandiae ) is a large, flightless bird common throughout most of mainland 
Australia.  Its population is large and stable.  Wild emus are formally protected in Australia under the 
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservatio n Act 1999.  
 
  

--- Page break ---

Gerenuk  
 Near Threatened – IUCN  
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
The gerenuk ( Litocranius walleri ) formerly occurred widely in the semiarid bushland o f northeastern 
Africa.  It still occupies large parts of its historical range in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania, but it has been 
severely reduced in Somalia.  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Also known as the “giraffe -necked antelope,” the total current population of gerenuk is estimated at 
95,000, but only 10% of those animals occur in protected areas.  Outside of these protected areas, the 
populations are declining due to over -hunting, livestock grazing, and habitat loss and fragmentation.  It 
is predicted that it may eventually disappear from large parts of its current distribution.  
  
  

--- Page break ---

Przewalski’s Horse  
 Endangered – IUCN  
Population Trend – Increasing   
 
Przewalski’s horse is a rare subspecies, Equus ferus przewalskii,  of wild horse.  It once ranged from 
Germany and the Russian Steppes east to Mongolia and northern China.   
 
The subspecies was at one time extinct in the wild, having last been seen in 1969.  Reintroduction efforts 
from captive breeding programs began in the 1990s, and a small population of about 300 individuals is 
now free -living in their native Mongolia.  This small population is vulnerable, however, to disease, loss of 
genetic diversity, and  hybridization with domestic horses.   
 
Other animals have been released in China, Hungary, and in the Ukraine into the area evacuated after 
the Chernobyl nuclear accident.  This area, permanently off- limits for human habitation, has become a 
natural prese rve and supports the largest herd of Przewalski’s horse outside of Mongolia.  
 
 
 
  

--- Page break ---

Asiatic Wild Ass  
 Endangered – IUCN  
Population Trend  – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Asiatic wild ass ( Equus hemionus ) once ranged through much of Mongolia and parts of Russia, China, 
Central Asia, and the Middle East.  By the 19
th Century, its range had declined significantly.  Its total 
population is estimated to have declined by more 50% over the past 16 years, and i s predicted to 
continue declining by more than 50% over the next 10 -20 years.  
 
Threats to the species include loss of habitat as a result of human settlement, cultivation, overgrazing, 
conflicts with humans over crops, competition for water, competition wi th domestic livestock, and 
poaching.  Fragmented habitats, which result in small and isolated population  put these animals at 
greater risk for due to disease, drought, or other catastrophic events.  
  
  

--- Page break ---

Mountain Zebra  
 Vulnerable – IUCN  
Population Trend – Unknown  
 
 
 
The mountain zebra ( Equus zebra) is native to the 
rugged mountain slopes and grasslands of 
Namibia and South Africa.  Today, natural 
popul ations have been reduced largely to 
protected areas (parks and reserves).  The 
species is dependent upon the availability of 
perennial water sources.  In Namibia, the 
establishment of artificial waterpoints has 
allowed some populations to occupy previously  
unsuitable habitat.  The species is considered threatened due to its total population size of just 9,000 
mature individuals and indications that their numbers may be declining.  More research is needed, 
however, to determine their current population trend . 
The two subspecies, the Cape Mountain zebra and the Hartmann’s mountain zebra, historically have 
been separated by unsuitable habitat and may actually constitute two distinct species.  Introduced 
populations, however, have led to overlaps in their distribution and interbreeding of the subspecies.  
The primary threats to the species are loss of habitat to agriculture, livestock production, and fencing 
that prevents access to water.   Harvesting of the species for the commercial trade of pelts also may be a 
threat, as the harvest may exceed the rate of population growth in some areas.  
  

--- Page break ---

Polar Bear  
 Vulnerable – IUCN  
 Threatened –  USFWS 
Population Trend – Decreasing  
 
 
 
 
Polar bears ( Ursus maritimus ) are found throughout the ice -covere d waters of the Arctic in Alaska, 
Canada, Greenland, Denmark, Norway, and Russia.  They depend upon sea ice to hunt seals and other 
marine mammals, their primary prey.  When the sea ice melts in the summer, they must spend time on 
land, fasting and dependi ng upon their stored fat reserves until the ice re- freezes.  
 
Global climate change poses a substantial threat to the habitat of polar bears.  The sea ice is melting 
sooner and freezing later, and expanding in range, to the point that some polar bears are s tarving.  With 
less food, those that survive are failing to reproduce as often, and those that do reproduce give birth to 
smaller young which have higher mortality rates.   
 
There are currently 20 -25,000 polar bears worldwide.  The latest research indicate s that if climatic 
trends continue, polar bears may become extirpated from most of their range within 100 years.   


--- Page break ---

Brown Bear  
 Least Concern –  IUCN  
 Threatened (lower 48 states) – USFWS 
Population Trend – Stable     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The brown bear  (Ursus arctos ) is the most widely distributed species of bear.  It once ranged throughout 
Europe, Asia, the Middle East, northern Africa, and a large portion of North America, southward into 
Mexico.  It now occurs in northwestern North America, with healt hy populations in Alaska and Canada, 
as well as parts of Europe and northern Asia.  Although the species’ range has declined, on a global scale 
the population remains large (more than 200,000) and is not significantly declining in numbers.   
 
The subspecie s that occurs in North America, Ursus arctos horribilis , is known as the grizzly bear.  In the 
lower 48 states, the subspecies is listed as Threatened due to highly fragmented habitats that have 
resulted in small and isolated populations in Idaho, Montana,  Washington, and Wyoming.  The grizzly is 
known from just five isolated areas in the lower 48 states today, and they number less than 1,700 bears.  
 
Although the grizzly bear is a protected species, the process of the species repopulating its former range 
is hampered by the bear’s slow reproductive rate, the reintroduction of competing predators such as 
grey wolves to some of these areas, and conflicts with humans over livestock protection and human 
safety.   

--- Page break ---

Asiatic Black Bear  
 Vulnerable – IUCN  
Populati on Trend – Decreasing  
 
The Asiatic black bear ( Ursus thibetanus ), also known 
at the moon bear because of the white crescent 
moon shap e on its chest, is native to much of 
southeastern Asia, a narrow band through the 
Himalayan Mountains, and parts of western Asia.  The 
species relies upon forested habitats.  Although no 
rigorous population estimates are available for the 
species, it is li kely that the species is declining in most 
parts of its range.   
One of the threats to this species is loss and 
degradation of forest habitats due to logging, 
expansion of human settlements, roadways, and 
hydroelectric power stations.  Deforestation is a 
growing problem and has resulted in the isolation of 
some bear populations into forest fragments that are 
too small to maintain healthy populations.  
The primary threat to the Asiatic black bear is the 
illegal commercial trade in live bears and widespread 
killing of bears for bear parts.  The bears are hunted 
for their skins, paws (a delicacy in some Asian cultures), and especially their gall bladders for bile.  The 
bile is used in traditional Chinese medicine and traditional Korean medicine.  
In China, comme rcial bear farming was initiated in 1984 to harvest bile from live, captive bears.  It was 
hoped that this practice would reduce the taking of wild bears.  Most of the bears for the farms, 
however, are captured from wild populations.  Further, the increase d availability of legal bile from these 
bear farms has fueled an increase in demand for bile.  This situation has resulted in increases in the 
capture of live bears for farms as well as the killing of wild bears for their bile.  
Although the species has pro tected status in almost all countries within its range, the laws often are not 
enforced.  Efforts are underway in some countries to reduce habitat degradation, establish more 
protected areas, and reintroduce bears from captive breeding programs to protected parts of their 
former range.  But the most beneficial conservation measure for the species would be to lessen the 
demand for bear products substantially, thereby reducing hunting and trade.  That complex cultural 
issue, however, has no simple solution.  

--- Page break ---

 
Blue Morpho Butterflies  
 Potentially threatened by over -collecting  
 
Collecting specimens (of any species) from the wild can result in dramatic impacts on populations.  
Removing large numbers of individuals for hobby/art, folk remedies/medical purposes, o r culinary 
reasons can threaten species.  Numerous large or brightly colored insects (especially butterflies and 
beetles) are threatened or endangered from over -harvesting in fragile habitats.  Some insects are now 
being legally farmed in tropical countrie s to ease the pressure from wild collecting.  
   
Blue morpho butterflies (genus Morpho ) are large 
and showy butterflies and are highly sought by 
collectors.  In 1996, two boxes of blue morpho butterflies that had been illegally collected  in 
South America and sold for profit to a collector 
were confiscated by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
agents.  After the legal case against the collector 
was closed, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
donated the specimens to the NSRL’s Invertebrate 
Zool ogy Collection.   
 
 The "Customs" document from the box of imported butterflies clearly stated the cont ents were "for 
Scientific Study" and of "No Commercial Value" (= N.C.V. on label).  Yet, the enclosed letter/invoice 
clearly showed the specimens were for commercial 
purposes.  The insects were collected in the forests of 
Guyana (South America) and mailed to Fort Davis, Texas.  
  

--- Page break ---

Rocky Mountain Locust  
 Extinct  
 
 
 
 The Rocky Mountain locust ( Melanoplus spretus ) was the most important pest that ranged throughout 
most of western North America until the end of the 1800s.  Sightings often placed thei r swarms in 
numbers far larger than any other species of locust.  One swarm in particular, in 1875, covered 198,000 square miles (about ¾ the size of Texas), weighed 27.5 million tons, and consisted of some 12.5 trillion 
locusts.   
 
The last living example  of this locust died in 1912.  Its extinction represents the only major pest species 
that has been driven into extinction as a result of human activity.  It has been suggested that the breeding grounds of the insect came under continued agricultural develo pment (by homesteaders and 
by gold miners) the underground eggs of the locust were destroyed.  
 
 


--- Page break ---

